Induction






Etiology or Teleology?
I first learned about the existence of etiology and teleology from The Courage to be Disliked, by Ichiro Kishimi and Fumitake Koga. The sharp contradiction between etiology and teleology, as they explained it, poured over me like ice-cold water in the middle of deep sleep, especially after having read Complex PTSD by Pete Walker so recently. Let’s break them down as a refresher or introduce them if you haven’t heard of these terms before. They’re foundational:
Etiology – Greek Root: aitia, which means “cause, responsibility.” The study of causes. The origin. 
Teleology – Greek Root: telos, which means “goal, result.” The study of goals. The end. 
	Do you see how tricky it can be to pick either etiology or teleology as a lens? Are there only causes? Are there only goals? Disorienting, really. So, I had to take a step back and think. To literally think about thinking. Funny right? But seriously, where does thinking, feeling, and doing happen? 
Simple: the brain. My brain. Your brain. Their brain. BRRAAAAAIIIIIINNNNNNZZZZZZ. There’s this guy named Peter Putnam who made this Outline of a Functional Model of the Nervous System in 1963. A very academic hoity-toity piece of work for sure, but he says that the brain is a bunch of correlated neurons.  As much as people love and/or hate their brain, that’s where the thinking, feeling, and doing originate. To see the big end goal of the brain – the teleological end – we kinda have to see where the brain originates – the etiological origin from the perspective of a neuron. 
If the brain is made of a bunch of neurons, then what does a neuron do? Why does that matter? Teleology: do neurons have goals??? Etiology: Are they reacting to causes??? My answer might surprise you: sort of both! HUH!? The closest word I could make up would: goal-cause. But before we dive any deeper, we’re gonna need to make some new words to encapsulate “sort of both” and goal-cause into something with more coherent meaning. Let’s hybridize etiology’s Greek root with teleology into... teleoaitia. It literally means “purpose-cause.” Then, the study of these goal-causes would be:

Teleoaitology: Greek Roots: telos + aitia = teleoaitia, which means “goal-cause.” The study of goals which cause, or the study of the origin to the end.

The seed to freedom’s been planted to support our goal-causes. Let’s see if we can breach through the dissonance, contradiction, and confusion, together. I want to see if there’s a bottom to all of this. Let’s dive in. 

  Harper, D. (2025). etiology. In Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved July 30, 2025, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/etiology

  Harper, D. (2025). teleology. In Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved July 29, 2025, from https://www.etymonline.com/word/teleology

  Putnam, P. (1963). Outline of a Functional Model of the Nervous System. Peter Putnam Papers. Retrieved July 30, 2025, from https://www.peterputnam.org/outline-of-a-functional-model-of-the-nervous-system-putnam-1963
